When speaking words is synonymous with taking action, it is called performative language. 

"I promise this." 

"I declare this the day of awareness for something." 

“I now pronounce you such and so." 

This was much the same. She was familiar with the use of words to invoke power. She believed herself to be well-versed in intentionality. This was a very basic kind of magic, but she was not so foolish as to believe this would be like working with her mentor.

"I agree." 

She felt it at once. She could feel his power creeping into her, dozens of beetles crawling up her arms, pinching at her fingertips. She felt the scraping of mandibles and spiny limbs around her wrists and forearms before burrowing into her biceps. The pain overcame her fear briefly and gave her a moment of clarity she dearly needed. 

She could see him now as he was as they briefly shared the same reality. She forgot why she had referred to it as "he", but he was gripping her arms and digging his fingers into her flesh.

When he released her, the moment passed and she saw only shadows. After that, it wasn't too uncomfortable, something nearly at rest beneath her skin, but she knew that would change if she tried to break her commitment. 

Only the slightest catch in her breath at the end betrayed any reaction, and it was not fear or regret, but excitement. 

His face began to twist into something that might have been a smile on some other creature. 

She was looking for something or some things, that part was easy, but she didn't know exactly what they were, so she had come to him to make a trade. He would have to work some fast deals to identify the treasure she sought, but he could arrange that. In exchange, she had value as an asset and secrets for him yet to mine. 

The not-quite smile faltered as something scratched at the inside of his mind. If she could have seen his face, it was a mask of such cold indifference he that would have given himself away. He turned slightly away as he disappeared.

When she felt sure he was gone, she sat at the crossroads and felt her weariness catch up to her for just a moment. She didn't yet know how to measure the cost she had paid, but she would find a way to account for it when the time came. She didn't know what to expect next, but she had to move soon. She could replay the brief exchange in her mind later, but she needed to get somewhere safe first. 

She made herself stand without wobbling.

She forced a leg to move without dragging her foot.

She walked on legs so tired that she couldn’t feel them, so she let her feet drag as she brushed away the salt and soil. She collected her candles, trying not to think of what she had done. Her blood sank, leaving her pale and a little sick. Fortunately, it didn’t take but a few more scuffs to obscure the site.

The muscles around her eyes hurt and as the sun began to glow below the horizon, she counted the hours she'd been awake. She had napped in the afternoon sixty-something hours ago, wanting to be fresh for the night. She shook her head violently and stood. She smiled to herself as she turned from the light and took the left path toward whatever village she might find down the road. She could have all that she needed before the next break of dawn. 

When she could see the village ahead, she left the road. She had been passing farmland for some time now but had seen no one. The rising sun was getting warm on her shoulders, but here there was a dense forest to the south, dark and inviting. She made for as dark a patch as she might find, having enough wisdom of plants to pass through the thorns. She was a stranger here and didn't know who might be pursuing her. 

She unwrapped some hard cheese and harder bread and sat to consider the events that brought her here. Starting at the end, she had walked some hours from the crossroads watching for laborers in the fields and hadn't seen any. 

Before that she had sealed her bargain, such as it was. She hadn’t the focus to parse that just now. She had come to the crossroads purposefully, but the actual events were cloudy in her mind

She had spent the prior day in preparation for what she was to do. The things she needed were easy enough to come by. The difficulty would be in finding the right place. It couldn’t be just any corner of alleys or crossing of footpaths. There was an old gallows, not half a day’s ride away at a crossroads, but she was on foot. She hadn’t known anyone to be hanged there in the years since she had come, but it was an old place. 

When she passed it nearly a year ago the very air shimmered with something like heat welling up from below. She knew it was also a crossing of ley lines. It was a place of power and this was to be a new moon. 

That, she knew, could be no coincidence. She wouldn’t think of who had conspired to set events into motion, not now.

She had escaped only barely from the fire she and her master had stoked, his funeral pyre. As quickly as the flames illuminated the area, they snuffed themselves out, leaving nothing much larger than a pea. Any roots or other plant matter down several inches below the surface was incinerated and the clay was baked and cracked. As her last act as his student, she had burned her teacher and scorched the very earth where he stood.

These had been his wishes, she knew, but it made less sense to her than the day he first told her. She was an avid student and he was ever tempted to teach her more and deeper secret truths, but he had also warned her of the dangers. He had lived as a hermit longer than she knew and had much to share, but his research was something else. 

Given time he could teach her to control the very air, allowing her to fly or to suffocate a victim at a whim; these and other forces he had long since mastered. His latest research was into another power entirely. He could not control it; he could barely sense it. He was convinced of its importance and her only part in his experimentation was as assistant and witness, though she could scarcely describe what he had shown her so far. 

When she had come around midday before, she found him raving. She had been away about a week and it seemed unlikely he had eaten much or slept in that time, or bathed. She brought him warm spiced wine to calm him, but his utterances were incoherent. He tried to sip the cup before gasping for air as though drowning. His arms flailed and wine spilled down his chin into his beard as he could not swallow. 

She half carried him to his cot and he lay down. He slept, or at least lost consciousness for a time. When he woke there was a moment when a spark of lucidity shone in his eyes as he recognized her and his fear for her was plain. They had discussed this eventuality, what might happen if he failed, and what would be left for her to do.

He barked out a coughing noise that she realized was referring to his notes, so she brought them to him expectantly. He held her firmly with his eyes, probably the last strength he had left, as he emptied the armload of papers into the hearth fire. He could not swallow water and he labored to breathe. So he pointed, indicating that she should burn his instruments and books. It was past midnight when soaked in sweat and black with soot, she pushed both chairs over the fire.

Finally, he took up the orb. She had never seen him touch it with his bare hands. He was carrying it to the growing fire when he climbed on top of it. The flames at his feet twisted and rose to embrace him. He had told her that no scrap of his research was to leave his small hut while so little of it was understood. She had seen to it that there would be little more than soot remaining, even as the sky opened up above them.

She grabbed a box and some food and her books wrapped in a cloth from by the little entryway and ran into a rain-soaked morning. There was a white-hot wall of fire behind her for only a moment before the little hut collapsed in on itself and disintegrated.

Then, as the embers cooled, she bathed in the rain as best she could, washing tears and soot from her face and body, far from anyone who would disturb her. It was bracing cold, but she needed to be clean from the night's work. 

When she wiped her eyes, she saw what she had waited for, hoping not to find; that black sphere stood untarnished as the coals crumbled into the mud around it. That fire had left not so much as a tooth of her former master, nor had it left any blemish upon the orb. Now she would have to find some means to conceal it.

Her robes were still sodden and filthy, but at least she didn't think she looked like she had aided an old hermit’s self-immolation. There was nothing left but a large scorched area, now slightly concave and filled with a soup of charred debris, muddy and pebbled with clumps of carbon, and a sphere in the middle, impossibly smooth and black so deep that it could appear as a hole in the world.

That depth of that darkness had always frightened her, even as she was fascinated to study it. She wasn't sure why it didn't scare her now except that it shouldn't be real. It didn't react to impacts or pressure quite as it should. They had tried measuring its circumference by wrapping a thread around it, but they couldn't find its center and gave unreliable results. Her master had created a light so bright it outshine the midday sun and it had revealed not the slightest imperfection, nor did it reflect, nor did it cast a shadow. Being a sphere, of course, it had no edges to speak of, but it was so deeply black that in that dazzling light, she felt as though she could not see where it stopped and the space around it began.

Now silver and blue markings were sliding across its surface. 

Heedless of any danger of the smoldering ruin or that the orb itself might be hot, she ran and scooped it into her arms. 

The markings were runes, though she would not read them. It was a song she could almost make out. The rhythms were shifting as the chorus rose and her numb fingers released it and she collapsed. When she awoke she was thankful to see that little time had passed. The sun had not yet risen.

The orb seemed smaller now, though they had never managed to accurately measure its circumference. There were no runes and she was loath to look at the thing, let alone touch it. She shook herself, wrapping it in a cloth and dropping it in a sack where she had gathered what she knew she would need among her few wet belongings. 

She realized that she would have to leave anything she didn’t have with her. She tried to look as if she intended to pay a visit to a nearby friend and not as though she wanted to flee town immediately. The locals respected the old man, maybe feared him, but they also credited him with some of the bounty they produced locally. They would bring him fish from the river or fruit they had grown, as though he enriched the very water and soil. Perhaps he did? No matter, she did not trust that they loved her as much as they had him.

She acted as if she were paying respects to another lost friend at the local cemetery, but his hole in the ground wouldn’t do her any good. Only a few knew his plot had been specially deconsecrated as his remains would never rest on holy ground. She stopped one headstone short, kneeling at the final resting spot of a girl who had passed in her 12th year. She genuinely felt for the loved ones this child must have left to mourn her, but she needed the dirt. A few handfuls in a small pouch would suffice.

She waved to a baker as though nothing were amiss. Surely, the stench of the old mage's pyre would have carried like char on the breeze, but the night’s rain and somehow the winds were favoring her as well. No one would go looking for the hermit soon. 

She was tired, but by dusk, she could see the silhouette of the old gallows atop the hill and she could hear the thrum of one of the lines this road seemed to follow. 

The unpleasant part now would be finding a cat. It shouldn’t be difficult to find. She could hear birds and any cats would be hunting, but she was a better huntress. She disliked the blood sacrifice but that was a small matter next to her actual goal. 

She waited for some way off the road and found cover when a rider passed. When midnight approached she lit her candles and used the grave dirt to inscribe a circle, next, she put herself inside a smaller circle of grave dirt and salt. She dug a small hole for the box with a few coins, some bones from the cat, and a few other items. She cut her right hand and dripped a few precious droplets into the box before covering it with dirt, and a few more drops in the outer circle before closing herself in the middle and sitting down to focus.

When the midnight hour arrived she heard teams of horses racing toward her from all directions, but she kept still. She saw black silhouettes against pinprick stars floating in the night and they were not horses, but nearer to wolves. They had shoulders and haunches impossibly wide and near as tall as a horse. She saw something like a reptilian eye-shine flash dim red and white hot then winked out as it swung its head.

She felt the heat of their breath too near to her as they snorted and extinguished the candles leaving her in the inky blackness of night. Her adrenaline had spiked on knowing that she had made contact, and it left her now with the naked fear of what she had contacted.

She reminded herself of why she was here. She had to simultaneously uncover and keep secret this artifact and others like it, and maybe destroy them if such were possible. 

The fear was there, however, and it was ever more alluring than the drops of blood she had shed to bring him here. She wouldn’t stifle it if she could; she knew something of these creatures. Provided she did not succumb entirely her very real fear was the bait. For all that, she did not like that she did not know where he was.

She could feel him moving in the darkness, testing the outer circle she had confined him in and the inner circle which would be her best defense if negotiations became hostile. More hostile, actually, because no one likes being summoned and confined. He was circling her, examining, appraising and when he finally spoke, she was shocked by the beauty of his voice.

"You are young but not too innocent,” he said, sounding disappointed. “What could you possibly have worth trading with me?”

She set a small ring of fairy fire inside her circle. It provided no heat and only cast a dim glow, but it served to illuminate the area slightly. Now she saw something large, now on two legs and leering over her, then on four legs pacing or crawling on its belly as a great lizard or something serpentine. She could make out clearly that it was agitated and predatory, but otherwise, it seemed an almost formless shadow in the darkness. 

She started to answer, “I’m not giving you my…” 

“Soul? Of course not, that’s what I’m saying. You think you are in despair and willing to pay the cost for what you need, but you understand none of it. Why? You are so new you still feel regret for killing that cat.” 

He stopped in front of her and dropped to a crouch, taking on an almost human appearance, he rested his elbows on his knees. Folding his hands, he looked down a now aquiline nose at her. 

“Just between the two of us, it wasn’t strictly necessary, but I do appreciate your attention to detail.” His lips curled into a smile that cut deeply. It might even be true, but she thought she had concealed some of the pain. He thought the trip was almost worthwhile just for that.

“I’m here, so let’s see whether my night is wasted. Tell me what you seek.”

"I must continue my master's research."
