Of course, he paid close attention to the words she used, intentionally open ended, but he had also seen her eyes. 

He couldn't give her a proper price with the sparse information she had, but he would return the next night with a proposition including instructions to construct a different kind of circle. She would still have protection, but he would be invited, not summoned, and she had agreed. 

Returning to his personal hell, he bartered with a neighbor for the soul of a particularly dark wizard. He had spent a subjective several hundred years assisting a demon in preparing and serving people dishes they believe to be composed of their loved ones. In reality, he had only been claimed a decade ago, and this was not the first torment to which he had been subjected, but there might be some morsel left to it, a chance encounter related to his pursuit.

He let the soul rest in a nearly flat bowl of obsidian while he checked some of his own books. Finding nothing in his own limited library, he prodded at the sickly thing in the bowl. It would be pointless to speak to it, but he stuck a curved fingernail into the middle and swirled it around. It twisted and began to take on a shape like a flat worm with flickering memories or ideas sparking from both ends. He was searching for related to the girl's master. As the worm sqirmmed, it became clear that there was nothing to be learned from this. Ether this wizard didn't know about the old man or there wasn't enough of this pitiful thing left to remember, and he burned it in his frustration. 

He knew he could get exactly what she needed, but not at a price she could pay, and certainly not to his profit. So, he tried again to find her master, or where he had found the item. Finally, he found a demon who new had dealt with the old hermit some time since, long before he came into possession of the orb.

Even then, however, this creature had sensed something strange to the old man's power and he too made use of some sigil unknown to the lowly thing. Luckily, the demon could at least describe the rune he saw.

With these details, and some small bribes paid, he was able to trace the hermit's movements back to where he began his quest for the artifacts. As dusk approached, he knew she would be reaching out to him soon. He also knew he had paid too much and bought too little, and he would have to take a loss in the near term or lose this prospect entirely.

This put him in a temper, but he wouldn't let it interfere with good business. So, he crushed the broken shards of the burned soul into a powder and spat on it. He invested just enough power to waken the damned thing to a new kind of unlife and returned it to his neighbor to renew his amusements. 

Just then, he felt a slight pressure in his forehead he knew it was time. He found her circle and he stepped into it, crossing into what she thought of as reality.
