What began as natural fissure with some worked stone soon was all carved but kept a natural appearance with shallow steps almost smoothed in places from wear.

The lay of the town had always lead him to believe the granite was solid all the way thru. He had seen channels carved in places for sewage or areas flattened to support the old fortifications, but this was another world.

The old man, he saw now, was not nearly so aged as he had thought. Eventually they stopped descending, not at the bottom, however deep that may be, but at a long landing. He could just see some dim light at the end where the steps must continue. The man turned to him and said, "our guild submits a candidate whenever asked, even I am not quite sure how they decide. In order to qualify, therefore, you are now my apprentice within the guild."

"You may ask me anything you like about your training from here on, except in your capacity within this company. What I do know of it I can never tell, and I know as little as I can. You will need to tell me, in advance if possible, when these responsibilities conflict with your apprenticeship, but I have asked you to put this first, and I think I am right to do so. I don't know when to expect you, but you will be sent to me directly. I think there is time you one question before you must go inside."

Given he could not ask more about tonight, he asked the only other important question he could think of. "Should I call you Guild Master in private?"

"Excellent. In any company, should you need to address me at all, Master will suffice. Yes, I think you will survive this night and begin your apprenticeship soon."

The boy cast his eyes down and said, "thank you, Master." The door opened, but the man did not turn to look, he simply nodded to the boy who looked up again as the man walked away and the boy set down upon an even darker path. At the end of a short passage, the door was closed behind him he saw several figures dressed as plainly as he but not according to their custom, he thought. 

There were nine, including a hooded man standing at a door opposite the one he came in. The other eight were perhaps a year or two older than he. Two were girls. Alone, he had dirty hands, even after washing it showed under his nails. Three of the older boys had rough hands and each was larger and more muscular than the last.

The other four, no three, he reappraised the girl he had mistaken and decided she likely had concealed more than that fact. The other three, then, were slight and had soft looking hands. He sat like the others on an upturned barrel, relaxing his toes so that his sandals nearly rested on the floor. He fought the urge to kick.

The door he had entered reopened admitting two more boys. One boy he recognized instantly as the scion of a wealthy merchant family. The other he knew to be the eldest son of a local lord. As soon as the door shut behind them the man at the other end of the room turned and opened the door he had guarded.

Without being told, the children filed out of the antechamber into a more cavernous room, almost like a theater. The ceiling was lost in the darkness above. The children passed almost naturally to one side of a railing which divided most of the room on the other side was a stone table, or perhaps an altar. 

The boy had heard of the Christian God and many local gods, but having never known himself to encounter them in his life, he had only an idea of reverence, but he was feeling something now. He had feared, but never been awed. That was when he heard the shuffling of feet and noted that there was a balcony above which was filling with shadows moving the the darkness. 

The boy had broken into a theater once, stealing some props and costume jewelry, and had exited across the stage to an alley. He remembered that stage now. He had no real notion of the kinds of things plays were made about and it was just a big empty space to him, except now there was an audience and he was being watched. This went against his every instinct to go unnoticed. He was deeply uncomfortable, but he did his best to play cool and fade into the background. 

To his relief, he turned to face the railing and saw two men standing behind the table. Something was happening to draw attention away from him. One man held a large book, open some way in. The other man set on the table what looked like a dark lamp.  He'd used them before to shed what light he needed while not ruining his vision, except this one was too large for such a purpose. The man must have been strong to carry it quietly. 

"You will never tell anyone what you are about to see." The man with the book looked at the children as he spoke. "No one who has not seen can understand. No language spoken anywhere in the world has proper words for such things."

He turned slightly toward the lamp and began to sing. The tones were low and the sounds gutteral, but it felt like a song. As he sang symbols inscribed over the entire surface of the lamp began to glow and fade in time with the rhythm of the syllables. 

When he stopped singing, the other man lifted a slat which would have shone with light if this were a lamp.

What emerged was not light.
