I Unable to explain how she had arrived wherever she was or how she came to travel so far alone and afoot, she dismissed the idea of even approaching a local for directions. Instead, she surveyed the area as best she could. She was on a mountainside and could see smoke coming from some of the chimneys in the town below.

She saw a road leading out of the town into the mountains, and a creek running down the mountain to join a river bend where they had several small docks, barely enough to call it a port. She determined to find the creek, as a small spring would be an ideal location for a small group accustomed to distance even from this little hamlet.

She made her way east and gradually up the mountain. Soon enough she found small rivulets running over a rock ledge, pooling at the bottom and running of again. This wasn't the spring she wanted; more likely it was run-off rainwater from higher above. It hadn't been running this way long enough to wear a lip in the ledge, so she continued.

After walking a bit further she found some berries she recognized as edible and collected several handfuls. She followed a bit further downhill before she saw a clearing open before her. The spring was not here, but she could hear the water that was brought here by a small channel of wooden chutes filling a pool they had dammed, controlling the flow into a channel that served several small buildings on a lower terrace in many clever ways.

She was so astounded that she dropped eye level to the blades of grass around the pool. It was difficult to see where nature ended and artifice began. The mountain here had been sculpted to fit the purpose of habitation, but so had all that was built devised also to fit the mountain.

Her presence had been noted, but there was no sense of alarm or surprise in the two men who were waiting for her when she rose. "Please, follow us," came an almost jovial invitation in a voice that hadn't had recent exercise from the shorter of the two men. The other only smiled sincerely.

As soon as she had stepped onto the grass she felt something sink within her. Before she could take a step, likely back, the sinking turned into something within her silently screaming. The shorter man turned and looked abashed. 

"You were not warned? My deepest apologies. There is something here that seems to exclude certain forces, including the arcane power I believe you conjure. No one alive knows how it works, but some come here to experiment with potentially dangerous endeavors. With a little practice, you can sense the power and feel it flow, or how it would, but it just doesn't," he shrugs.

Taking a much more somber tone and taking on a gravity no one would have thought possible just a moment ago he continues, "Others come here not to experiment, but to remove themselves from magic. This is discouraged, but there are always necessary exceptions. He was one."

He paused for a moment. This was likely the most he had spoken in one conversation for several years. Catching up to himself, he continued "He was studying something dangerous and he was more secretive than most, but he was hiding *from* something as well. Rather than arranging for him to slip away, we unanimously agreed to hide him as long as we could."

"In the days leading up to his departure, he had become increasingly manic. From his appearance, I'd have guessed he hadn't eaten or slept in several days. I visited him early that day and found he had arranged piles of notes around his little room, but how they were sorted I could not guess. Some pages were covered in tight, neat script, other pages looked like diagrams or sketches, others held glyphs I could not identify."

He visibly considered whether to continue, realizing that doing so was itself an implicit decision. "I felt queer. I was just trying to make small talk and that made me feel awkward, but I thought I might draw him out if he needed help. That wasn't where the feeling came from. It was his notes, without context as he never told me or anyone what he was studying." 

The tempo of his speech was increasing as was the intensity of his voice. "The stacks of pages, some spilling into shuffled piles, the words, strings of symbols, a sketch of some dissected marine animal, poetry, a map describing a battle memorialized in folk tales of the small counties, journals of his daily diet and the dreams to follow, something about every detail of the entire collection."

He Had sputtered to a stop only a moment before his previously silent partner offered, "he came to us to hide from whoever might have an interest in his research."

Before either could speak again she exploded, "Where are his notes?!?" She instantly regretted the outburst and flinched so that she very nearly missed their expression, not shock but embarrassment. 

The little man turned to the taller one and sent him off for something. "Come with me," he said, more gently than when he first met her and she fell in behind him as he led her to a scorched patch of ground the approximate size and shape of the footprint of any of the surrounding buildings. 

She began to think she was having some traumatic deja vu except all of these buildings were carved or shaped basalt, and the clay beneath her feet was barely inches deep before hitting solid granite. These men seemed to think he left here alive. When she realized she was holding her breath she released it. It seems when he left, he destroyed his hut.

To be precise, it seems he melted his hut, the one made of basalt.

She knew that basalt melts between thousand and twelve hundred degrees, while granite needs to be just a bit hotter. 

She wondered at how he might have generated that kind of heat, especially where it seemed impossible to use magic and, as if summoned the taller man returned with a letter. He told her, "Somehow, this appeared atop the slab of stone about a week ago."


